#summary A description of how to get started with setting up a MyDas Server, including prerequisites.
#labels Phase-Implementation

[http://code.google.com/p/mydas/ <- mydas Home Page] | [HELP_INDEX Index] | [HOWTO_WritePluginIntro Selecting an interface to implement ->]


= Introduction =

This page describes how to set up the environment needed to create a MyDas DAS server and how to obtain the necessary source code and binaries for starting development.

= Details =

== Prerequisites ==

To create a MyDas server, you should ensure that you have the following installed and configured on your computer:

  * Sun Java SDK 1.5 (or later) available from http://java.sun.com
  * Ensure the JAVA_HOME environment variable is set correctly and JAVA_HOME/bin is included in your PATH environment variable.  Run `java -version` to ensure that the correct version of Java is available on the command line.
  * Maven 2 Project Management / Build tool available from http://maven.apache.org/
  * View the [http://maven.apache.org/download.html#installation Instructions for downloading and installing Maven 2] to ensure that you have a complete setup.  Run `mvn --version` on the command line to ensure that Maven 2 is correctly installed.

== Obtaining and configuring the project source and dependencies. ==

Thanks to Maven 2, you do not need to worry about obtaining the dependencies for this project, with the exception of the latest version of the core MyDas jar file (binary) that can be obtained from the [http://code.google.com/p/mydas/downloads/list Downloads tab] above.

=== Download and install the MyDas server core binary jar file. ===

  * Download the latest MyDAS server core: Binary jar file from the Downloads page on this site.  
  * Install this jar file into your local Maven repository using the following command, substituting the correct path / name of the binary jar that you have downloaded for the -Dfile= parameter:

  * `mvn install:install-file -Dfile=<path-to-mydas-jar-file> -DgroupId=uk.ac.ebi.mydas  -DartifactId=mydas -Dversion=1.0.1 -Dpackaging=jar -DgeneratePom=true`

=== Download the template project ===

  * Download `MyDasTemplate.zip` from the Downloads page and unzip in an appropriate location.  You now have a template project that you can configure in your favorite IDE to develop your own DAS data sources.  